Meeting 04.05.2020
================

## Individual meeting 1:05pm - 2:00pm

#### Present members: Manuel, Clara, Robert and Thomas

  - Make resume scanner
      - PDF
          - Pdfplummer
              - Clara’s idead
          - .extract\_text
      - Word
      - Grab a table with employ number one column and corpus in the
        second column
      - If it is an issue convert all the same pdf type
  - Response variables
      - High vs other
      - High, median, low
      - First 12 months compareson
      - Total number of activations / total number of hours
      - perform more EDA before deciding
  - EDA
      - Bar chart
      - Descripted
      - Correlation
      - Feature proposal
      - Final EDA report
  - Question for the meeting with glentel
      - Organizational Chart
      - What do they look for in a resume?
      - What is high a performer? What is the magic number?
      - Power-BI dashboards
      - Point of action:
          - primary goals week 1
        
          - Eda
            
              - focus on V2 tables
        
          - In process creating a resume scanner
        
          - Secondary goals
            
              - process text
              - Base model Count Vector
  - Exclusions:
      - Personnel who had a very low amount
      - Types of employees:
          - Rehires
          - Referrals
          - Part-times
          - Full-times
          
          
## Meeting with Glentel 2:00pm-3:30pm

#### Present members: Keith, Elena, Justin, Manuel, Clara, Robert and Thomas

- Started by telling them our plan of action of eda and resume
- What do they look for in a resume?
  - Education 
  - Retail experience? 
  - Competitor?
  - Fast food?
  - Tenor? 
    - Job hopper?
-	What is high a performer? What is the magic number?
  - Give an export that would 
  -	Flat by user name 
  -	By month, banner, username
  -	Top 25% 
  - Longer than 12 months 
  - At an overall 40%
  -	8 month comparison 
- Exclusions
  - Three months to be operating at a minimum
  - Key criteria of assessment
  - It is valuable to know about the employees who do not retain the three years 
- Dashboard walk through
  - Workspace 
  - Human resource dashboard 
  - Average is from every Friday not just end of the month 
    - Ww wireless
    - We Costco 
    - Tb tbooth
  - Mostly millennial
  - Anyone taken on within a given year
  - Over time 9 hours a day or 40 hours in a week 
  - Absent hours 
    - Short term
  - Sick hours 
    - Longer term
  - Vacation hours
    - Additional and minimum
    - 2019 hours and need to be taken and then let them 
    - Black out season, summer June-October, November-December   
- Dismissal
  - Keep resignations 
  - Remove dismissal  
- Onboarding costs
  - E-board
  - Screening time 
  - Managers time 
- Careful for sales per hour 
  - There are ways to skew this

